welcome to e2 talks it's a podcast in
which we chat about the English language
landscape conversing about topics
relevant to students like you
in this episode Jay sits down with Barry
Brown and Reza ties vary from IDP to
discuss how to conquer IELTS writing
task 2 hello guys it's very very nice to
have you here I'm very pleased that you
would come down from the offices of IDP
to visit e to language so thank you very
much for being here
you're very welcome thanks for the
opportunity just before you introduce
yourselves I just thought it'd be good
to sort of set the context as to why
I've invited you down to e2 language and
that is we're sort of getting to a size
now where we have a bit of a social
responsibility to make sure the
information that we're giving IELTS
candidates is as accurate as can
possibly be 100 percent accurate would
be great so on our IELTS YouTube channel
for example we've now just reached
quarter of a million subscribers which
is a lot we're now getting 50,000 views
per day we've had 12 million views in
total which means that we've had
actually people have watched our videos
for 1.6 million hours Wow fantastic
Reach is great it's amazing isn't it
yeah it's a hundred one hundred and
eighty two years of watching IELTS
videos on on our channel and we're now
signing up about actually in January we
just signed up 17,000 members to e2
language so Wow
yeah so the point is to give people the
best information possible so with that
background would you be able to
introduce yourself please
yeah sure my name is Barry Brown I'm one
of the ESN managers at IDP now my
responsibility is looking after the
conduct of the test the marking of the
test and monitoring the performance of
examiner's to ensure that everyone's
marking to the standard my personal
background is I've been my career has
been in teaching and for the last 20
years or so I've been involved in
language teaching and for most of that
as an IELTS examiner or
or examiner trainer and worked for many
years in Bangkok in fact for IDP
interesting and is it true that you were
once involved in physics I was
originally I was doing research in
particle physics in fact and decided it
was a very turbulent time in Australian
history and decided I wanted to do
something more useful to became a
teacher in a very tough working-class
school right Reza it's good to be here
and talk to your listeners my name is
reza
tes fury and i work as a senior team
leader for IDP i oversee the writing
marking the writing part of the
computer-delivered
IELTS test okay and as for myself I've
been in the English language teaching
industry for 21 years and for 11 years
of that I've been involved in different
ways with IELTS okay I've been working
with IDP and I've had different roles
currently I well as I said I oversee the
marking of computer-delivered IELTS
writing Suites fantastic well couldn't
have bit of people here to talk about
IELTS writing that's for sure
yes so as I may have mentioned the focus
of this podcast will be on IELTS writing
task 2 so basically we want to give
candidates the best possible information
so they can get the scores that they
need I thought we might start off by
just talking about just some sort of
common errors that examiner's might see
and some things that people should just
avoid yet probably the biggest problem
that we see in task 2 is where the test
taker doesn't actually answer the
question that they've been asked now you
can understand that in the pressure of a
test situation which is often extremely
important to the test taker that they
might read the question quite quickly
think they've understood it and then
start to write their answer and quite
often it's not answering exactly the
question that's been asked and I can
give you a simple example it's
is that a question is asking about the
causes of some problem and what the
solutions are now we would see a number
of candidates who would respond to one
part of that and not the other part
right and I can tell you that if you
look at the public descriptors you will
see that that kind of partial answering
of the question is given a band five for
task response for how well they've
answered the question so it's a huge
penalty to someone whose English ability
is actually very high to not fully
answer a question so that's the that
would be the number one thing that I
would say that that you've got to be
really careful to make sure you're
answering all parts of the question that
seems yeah because people may have
perfect language skills and yet write
slightly off-topic and there could be
the difference between the score they
want the school yes exactly and the
penalty is huge if they do that if
they're very good if they're for example
in native speaker right and and after
the test that person probably won't
remember and one they've done they're
going to think I wrote a really good
answer to that and they probably did to
the question that they were answering
it's just not what they were asked so
what's your suggestion then what
planning obviously the in the number one
is to simply read the question very
carefully and answer the question that
you've been asked don't jump to any
conclusions read it very very carefully
and then as as the test taker writes the
essay they need to be reflecting about
what part of this question by answering
so they do their introduction they get
into their first body paragraph and
reflect back on what was the question am
i answering some particular part of the
question and that step should go on all
the time through the essay so when they
move to paragraph two what am I now
answering my getting more support to
this part two the first part of the
question or am I now starting to answer
the second part of the question so they
need to constantly reflect on what am i
answering in the essay that I'm writing
which part of the
am i focusing on yeah yeah yeah that's
right and test day is a different day
because the pressure the anxiety exactly
exactly yeah so you can read something
quickly and and think you've understood
it and I would include myself in this
right it's all I seen that before I
understand that now read it carefully
because you may not have understood it
and just to add a bit the stress of the
test they may get to someone so track as
a piece of practical advice it is always
important to for the candidate just to
completely ignore the time constraint
for a few minutes and not to worry about
the time at all and think critically
about a question just look at the
question and try to analyze it that for
sure is going to save them time when
they're actually writing their the
answer yes so if they don't spend that
three four five minutes at the beginning
to completely understand the question
and well organize their ideas then it's
going to eat up their writing time yeah
well if they do it's going to help to
speed up their writing so that might
help in a sense good one yeah I agree
the analogy that I use when I'm talking
to my students is your friend has just
moved to the other side of the city are
you going to use the map or you're gonna
get in the car and just use your
intuition to get to the other side of
the city to find that precise
destination so that's a good example
exactly you want to map out what you're
gonna do first cool yes okay so that's
the most common area good one okay Barry
you mentioned something about a public
ban descriptors and I want to talk about
them specifically but what are they
first let's define that and the public
then descriptors are available
originally from IELTS all I think they
can be found but I can never find them
on the IELTS or website I just Google
for IELTS task 2 writing banned
descriptors and you'll get them very
easily and they are a very accurate
reflection of how a candidate is
assessed in the exam in fact when I used
to train new examiner's I would give
them a homework exercise before the
training I'm based on the public public
ban descriptors and there's really
everything
that a test taker needs to know in those
public band descriptors things like only
partially answering a question it will
tell you what the penalty is so don't
worry about the penalty worry about what
you've got to do it means I've got to
answer fully what the question is right
there's other things related to task one
that it tells you clearly in the
descriptors right that you must use
numbers for example when you answer
questions you must have an overview so
they're they're extremely useful in
knowing exactly what you need to do the
problem with the public band descriptors
is that they're hard to understand right
and you the test taker may need the
assistance of an expert like yourself to
to help them understand exactly what the
different profiles mean at the different
levels good yeah well they definitely
inform everything we do here at e2
language obviously everything's directed
towards them is there a big difference
between the public band descriptors and
the ones that the examiners use no
significant differences between the two
everything is there if you wanted a band
serve in a band aid even a band nine
every piece of information that you need
is in the public band descriptors to do
that okay okay great
cool all right well let's start with the
first one which is task achievement
risen what does task achievement mean
perhaps we should say task response
[Music]
that's fine it's basically in simple
language how well you answer the
question and that goes back to how well
you have understood the question gotcha
so any in any IELTS test you're given a
question for task two or what we call
the prompt and it asks you to do
something to express an opinion to
compare something to something else or
to for example describe two different
views and then express your own own
opinion it all depends on how well you
answer that question and depending on
how well or how completely or how fully
you have answered that question you will
get a
for task response okay interesting does
your opinion matter like if you have a
different opinion to the examiner or
something that may offend the examiner
for example it does that matter any
marked on that necessarily you shouldn't
write because it's not a test of your
knowledge or what you think it's not a
test of your ideas yeah but the thing is
that your the opinion you're expressing
should be logical enough in light of
what you have already put forth yeah so
you explain something you describe
something you give some ideas within
your writing and then you reach some
personal opinion as a conclusion for
example that should be logical yeah you
cannot say something and then something
say something else which is completely
irrelevant got it okay relevance is key
there and given that it's a test
situation it's it's it's an it is a
structured test situation you wouldn't
want to say something outrageous but
people are not judged on their ideas
that's what I can see good yeah I I I
have a personal tendency to get way too
philosophical in these exams and
sometimes I need to simplify my ideas
rather than you know try to impress
someone with how outrageous they can be
you know that's a really good point
in fact because it's possible to get a
really good score a very high score in
the IELTS exam but being fairly simple
and straightforward yes in the response
you know making sure you're answering
the question that's been asked making
sure you're backing up your answer and
if you look into public band descriptors
at band 7 for task response it talks
about expanding on your ideas right so
someone who presents for example just a
main idea with no support that's not
going to get a very high score because
it's not supported and tells you that at
band 7 right so you've got to have your
main ideas and then those ideas have got
to be expanded with supporting
information and you can do that in a
very simple way you don't have to have
huge amounts of knowledge to be able to
do that but as Reza said it's got to
make a logical argument right it can't
be internally contradictory for example
you asked before about opinion
a test taker has got to be consistent in
what their opinion is so um you might be
asked about the advantages and
disadvantages of something and what
what's your opinion about these are more
advantageous than disadvantages so the
test taker in that case would have to
talk about both advantages and
disadvantages and at the same time make
their opinion clear about which side
they're on in the argument and you don't
need complicated arguments you do that
my strong advice would be do it simply I
use the example of some of the best
writers in English write and write in a
simple way that's that easily
communicates your ideas yeah clarity
clarity exactly all right great
fantastic so what about the various
prompts that people might see on test I
understand there's a variety and we've
sort of been able to identify about sort
of five main ones would you be able to
speak to that sure there are there are a
range of questions that get asked I
looked at one time few years ago for my
own students when I was teaching in
Bangkok
and I looked at there was about 20
different sorts of questions that were
asked now I can't be specific about the
kinds of questions that do get asked in
the exam but I can tell you that the
they are publicly available in in the
sense that Cambridge publish IELTS the
Cambridge IELTS books numbered one
through I don't know what the last one
is it's up 1012 somewhere around there
now I think and in each one of those
books they have four academic tests and
to GT a general training tests and the
prompts that are used in those books are
real test questions and so what you
would do if you were a test taker and
you wanted to see what's what's the
likely form of questions you can be
asked you'd go and find the latest issue
of one of those Cambridge books and have
a look at some of the examples of
questions that are in there
looked as good and bad information on
the Internet
yeah my concern is with the terrible
information that's out there I've I've
read IELTS blog sites that have given
sample essays and said it's been nine
hmm and it's a string of main ideas and
so the ideas are not expanded as we just
talked about and and to give that as an
example to students is a terrible thing
but there's also good information out
there as well and just by googling IELTS
task 2 writing questions you get
literally hundreds and and hundreds of
examples and whilst there will be some
rubbish among them if you're familiar
with what's available in the Cambridge
books you'll have a pretty good idea of
what form of question gets asked in the
exam
hmm yeah yeah I spend a lot of time
talking to candidates about being
careful on on the internet with YouTube
or things their friends have told them
or even teachers to give them some
terrible advice and on that memory I
what I see is a teacher a lot is
template answers and one of the things I
tell my students is structures fine
memorizing a structure and si struct
everyone you know that's what you're
learning in high school that's what you
should take in in your mind into the
exam but what's you know the difference
between a template and a structure can
one of you talk to that oh look I
certainly used to teach my students
structure for essays about and I used to
teach students to start with an
introduction that addresses both sides
of the issue of this two questions
you've got our answer and makes your
opinion clear right there upfront at the
start and then in the body of an essay
in the in the paragraph I would tell
students have a topic sentence on the
paragraph have a couple of main points
and have a support one and the support -
for each of your main points right now
that's that results in for me quite a
wordy paragraph of a paragraph that's
really a bit too long but it's a basic
structure it's a really good structure
to use now
you could take that model and apply it
to any essay question and if you follow
it you'll get a fairly good score simply
because you've got main ideas and the
ideas are developed and provided they're
logical and provided they're connected
to the question then you're going to
score quite well the problem arises when
teachers and I've seen teachers do this
where they say begin with this sentence
hmm
and there's a couple of gaps and they
say fill the gaps with the main noun
from the question you know that is the
absolute worst advice even if the
candidate is able to do that and pick
the right now and so that the sentence
actually makes sense anyway at some
point the Canada is going to have to use
their own language skills to put to put
content into the essay and the
difference between the learn sentences
and their own sentence grammar and
structure is going to be plainly obvious
it's there's no secret about that it's
just you can't do it right and it's the
worst possible advice and just as an
aside when I was in charge of a DPS
Language Centre in Bangkok I would not
employ a teacher who did that and if I
found a teacher who did it they been
warned and if they continued to do it I
would not continue to employ them it is
it pays a terrible disservice to
candidates yeah well yep great advice I
agree templates are dangerous you asked
about the difference between structures
and and templates I would say that
candidates or test takers should avoid
templates at any cost yeah because as
Barry said learning how to structure
your writing is the way to go in the
sense that you read the question you
analyze the question and understand it
and ask yourself quite your this
question okay I have this are these
ideas how should I put them in a good
logical order to write a piece yeah and
then we've got the the ways of doing it
bring in support sentences and things
like that now the problem with templates
is that I know there's this tendency
among some teachers that would
categorize different
types and then they would ask their
students or they would recommend their
students to memorize certain templates
for example they said that if you've got
an agree or disagree question right like
this and that's where the danger is
because although the prompts might be
the same but the idea is that you have
to develop are not always the same and
you fall into this trap of writing
templates reproducing a template which
is not suitable to the prom that has
been given so practicing structuring
your essay is very important but maybe
you should all keep your distance from
templates and if anyone comes up with
the idea that you should stick with the
template that I'm giving you be cautious
I just add one thing to that it brought
back a memory to me where I had a young
man in tears in front of me because his
school had told him that there were
three types of questions type 1 type 2
type 3 and that he needed to learn
responses to each type now the Dane you
mentioned before about having five main
types of question the danger in thinking
of IELTS questions as a type is that
sometimes they're not sometimes it's a
mixture of one type and another and
that's why the only advice I ever give
to students is read the question and
answer the question you'll be able to do
that it won't be hard you will be able
to do it but if you start with the
headache of thinking well what type is
this and okay now what do I do
how do I answer that time that's a whole
lot of extra baggage you've got to carry
that may not help you in the end of may
actually be a disservice in the end it's
quite funny that such a critical piece
of advice is answer the question there's
such great lengths to sort of memorize
things and think themselves under
enormous pressure to imagine memorizing
a 250-word exactly yeah that's
extraordinary instead of remaining
flexible answering the question they'll
probably do much much better
absolutely that's quite funny good one
just quickly on word counts what is it
important to reach the 250 word
it is important in this sense that the
the word can of 250 words is an
indicator of how much you're probably
going to have to ride to produce a good
response to the question there's no
doubt you can write an answer to an a a
task 2 essay in 80 words but we talked
about having main points and then
developing those main points you're
probably not going to be able to do that
in 80 words so the the fact that that
word count is indicated as 250 words
it's a flag to say look you're probably
going to need to write this much in
order to get a good score on on this
task because you're going to need that
many words to develop the ideas that
you're going to come up with in the
essay so it is really important from in
that sense because a complaint all parts
in fact of the of your response write to
help you get a higher score so write to
the word length the recommended word
length would be my strong advice don't
write more right you wouldn't want to go
much over 250 words you use the time if
you're a really good writer use the time
for better planning or for reviewing
your work to pick up errors that you
might have put in your word in your work
it's much better to do that than produce
a 500 word essay or a 15 hundred word
essay and have lots of little errors
that you could have fixed if you'd gone
back to look at it so the word count
that's given is really important from
that perspective it's interesting I've
taken both exams paper-based and
computer-based and I've noticed that I
can type a hell of a lot quicker than I
can handwrite so I'm guessing that
you're seeing responses that are a lot
longer on the computer is that is that
right it's not unlikely yeah it's not
unlikely what would be good for the
candidates to remember that on the
computer-based IELTS platform there is
no spellcheck so if there are fast
typing and they can write long pieces
it's always good to pause or to stop
before the test finishes and go back and
have a look at what they have written
get rid of the typos or those spaces
that you might have entered we're
spacing is not necessary or in things
like that you might have created a
paragraph which shouldn't be there so in
terms of the length yeah if you're good
at typing it is you might get carried
away and write a 700 piece word if
there's no point is there to do that
yeah well you can't do it and you won't
lose any marks for doing that but
there's always the risk the risk is that
you may not be clear about everything
you have written so you might lose
clarity it might affect how you develop
your ideas and also the bigger risk is
you might create more errors spelling
errors grammar errors errors with
paragraphing for example as I mentioned
punctuation errors it is good to use
your time wisely if you can write 250
words which are clear and it gives you
some time to go back and review use that
time to go back and review instead of
writing more good one yeah yeah I found
it enormously helpful actually in the
computer-based exam I just had more time
so I could go back take my time edit
make sure there were no errors make sure
my ideas were clear make sure I had
supported them and had examples so yeah
we'll get to the computer-based test at
the end I think okay the next criterion
is coherence and cohesion can somebody
please just explain what does this mean
is coherence and cohesion is really
looking at how the essay is written how
does it hang together does does does it
follow logically from paragraph to
paragraph from sentence to sentence hour
how are the paragraphs linked together
how are the sentences linked together
is there an internal logic within the
entire response so that's what that
coherence and cohesion good hearing is
looking at okay interesting and okay so
we talked about sort of macro structure
which I'm guessing it has some bearing
here but also micro structure so the way
that the paragraphs are structures well
what what would be your tip for
structuring paragraphs and connecting
sentences what's the linguistic aspect
that well I've kind of given you the way
that I would structure a paragraph I
mean different people have different
ways of putting paragraphs together this
connecting sentences well the important
thing there is to make sure that ideas
flow smoothly so if you if you're
building in a an exception writer using
something like however you connect that
idea with the one that went before or a
consequence of something so using a word
like therefore to connect that idea to
the to the previous one that that's
quite important so that the language
flows fairly smoothly through the
through the paragraph and it's not just
jumping from one idea to another idea so
that's one of the things that's measured
in CC and pronouns are important here
for connecting the noun to the referent
pronoun well yes in fact if you look in
the public band descriptors it talks
about referencing and substitution and
that's use of pronouns so that you don't
have to repeat the same word over and
over again that you you find some other
ways of referencing so there's a number
of different things that get looked at
right one is how how sentences are
connected together and then referencing
so using pronouns to refer back to maybe
the main noun that that's in the
sentence in in the essay and
substitution which is the same kind of
thing but using another word that
essentially means the same so all of
those things come into that category
good you mentioned a couple of discourse
markers there however and therefore one
of the criterion says something about
overuse and under use of discourse
markers so sometimes I see essays that
are just peppered with discourse markers
every every sentence has it therefore as
a result you know and I think well too
much it's clunky so what's the how do we
strike a balance between using discourse
markers and using enough of them yeah
it's not so often that you'll see essays
where you you've got that kind of
situation right it's more a case of
where you'll have overuse for example
we'll link to different ideas together
and if I continually say and and and and
then that's the clear example of
overused alright because I don't have
another choice which is also a cohesive
device but if the only relative clause
structure that I use in the essay is
which which which which and then that
again is overuse of of that kind of
connecting device
[Music]
are you feeling anxious about your
upcoming IELTS exam not sure where to
start need an extra push or just a
reliable person to talk to e to talks
are a one-on-one a 45-minute session
just you and a dedicated IELTS expert
our team has taken the same test as you
so they know what you're going through
and what's ahead of you we're qualified
to give you the right answers all you
need to do is ask oconee to tutorial by
signing with e tu language today one of
the piece of advice that I give is if
you're using discourse markers like
however and therefore for example is to
sometimes put them in the middle of the
sentence rather than at the beginning is
that a good way to sort of excellent
advisor yeah absolutely excellent advice
it's it's one of the first examples I
used to give to my students in fact in
an in a sentence like although it was
raining we went swimming now lots of
people will put the discourse marker at
the beginning of the sentence but of
course you can say it the other way
around and say we went swimming although
it was raining now what the research
shows is that higher-level language
users will put that discourse marker in
the middle of the sentence more
frequently than they will put it at the
beginning of the sentence in relation to
lower-level users of the language so
just from a research perspective you
know what you probably should do in the
arts exam and let's use a mixture of the
two approaches so it's excellent advice
you're giving good good good next one is
everybody's favorite grammar but this
criterion is split into two range and
accuracy what's what's what is this main
range and accuracy
well when it comes to range sometimes
you can write or you can speak using
very simple language in the sense that
you can make all your sentences simple
sentences without any errors right is
that a bad thing not necessarily but for
the test that is not a good thing okay
because the test is going to see how
well you can use language and because of
that you have to aim at using both
simple structures
and complex structures so for example if
you say I'm a student I'm studying
English at e2 language I love my school
so these are three perfectly formed
sentences and if all your writing is
like that you're not going to get a good
mark for your grammar you need to do a
bit of work on your grammar in the sense
that you have to use subordination for
example you have to use some linking
words and you have to mix these
structures to show that well I can work
with different grammar structures so
that's when the question of range comes
in now you use a different set of
structures at the same time you have to
be careful not to make a lot of mistakes
because it is possible that when we are
mixing different elements for example
you're writing a passive structure or
you're using a second conditional you
don't use one of the verb forms
correctly that's when accuracy comes in
so range is there because we do not use
English or any language in simple form
all the time yeah so we need some
complexity to be able to express complex
ideas and that's when we need to write
some complex structures so we instead of
used making those three sentences that I
mentioned we can simply say I go to e to
learning language or e to language
school to learn English and I'm happy
because it's a good school so I have
done a very simple way of mixing these
structures to make a complex structure
just to give you an example and that's
how we use the language on an everyday
basis the same way we should do it in
the test do not stick with simple
structures all the time because we feel
confident that we are going to produce
perfectly well-formed simple structures
we need to use different structures and
just further to that I mean it might
come as a surprise to people that you
could write a grammatically perfect
essay and get a low score for it but if
you did what Reza suggested and use just
simple sentences
to structure an entire essay and the
public ban descriptors will tell you
that you're going to get banned for for
that because it banned for and grammar
range and accuracy
it says subordination is rare so if
there's no subordination at all it's
absolutely is rare and you're going to
get banned for for your grammar even
though every sentence was perfectly
correct but the range wasn't there just
briefly described subordination to the
audience and the concept of
subordination is that you can fit more
information into a shorter sentence
and there's different forms of it so
relative clauses are one example so I
like food which is hot mmm I like food
which is spicy that's a relative clause
it actually does exactly the same job as
I like spicy food but that's a more
complex structure and puts more
information into that sentence so you've
got relative clause type subordination
and then you've got other subordinate
structures like the use of although that
I did before although it was raining we
went swimming anyway and then you've got
choices about where you put the
subordinating conjunction at the
beginning or in the middle of the
structure so that's a couple of
different examples of subordination
there are a number of others but those
are two very common ones well advice
would you give to somebody who's grammar
is not that good
should they be focusing more on accuracy
or should they still try to extend
themselves a little bit with range yeah
good question
both of those things matter and they
made it equally okay I'm so you can't
get a high school if you've got one and
not the other I mean a candidate might
have a huge range of sentence structures
and they know it will be wrong and
that's going to bring their score way
down the range might be good enough to
get a band-aid but if nothing is correct
now they're going to be very much lower
than that maybe as well as a band for so
both things matter you can't consider
one without the other but the range is
absolutely important as we saw with that
criterion at band
or that says without subordination you
won't go above band four so there's
lesson number one I've got to learn some
subordination and I can't memorize that
I've got to actually learn how to do it
that's right
that's right because it has to express
an idea that's right yeah yes okay great
interesting alright and the last
criterion is lexical resource which is a
complicated phrase for vocabulary right
so again with vocabulary as I understand
it they need to have precision and range
and one of the problems that we have
with actually there's problems with both
of those I see a lot of essays that have
words that people have tried to put in
there because they sound fancy can you
just talk about precision for a second
look with lexical resource it's very
similar to grammar range and accuracy
because two things are important one is
the accuracy and the other one is the
range and you're dead right that an
essay can be peppered with very high
level vocab that may or may not fit in
the essay and we see lots of examples of
high level vocab that actually doesn't
it's not used correctly it's not doesn't
fit in the particular essay and so so
that's that score is going to come down
because of that because it fails to be
accurate yes it's got some high level
vocab but that's not good enough it's
not enough to simply learn high level
vocab it's got to be used accurately in
in the essay so you know I've certainly
met students that have been told by
teachers to learn okay there's a few
YouTube videos out there that say use
these five words to Kanaya eight yes
it's terrible terrible advice yeah and
again you know I think the research
shows that on average in English native
speakers use about 4,000 words per month
or so in their normal language native
English speakers actually don't use huge
numbers of high-level words and if you
read newspapers and magazines you can
often tell before you look at the author
whether they were a native speaker or
not because non
speakers will use much better vocab than
native speakers will in their writing
look having a wide range of vocab is a
really good thing right learning new
words all the time is a really good
thing but you only use the language you
need in in the test that answer the
question that's in front of you
and if you've got some really good vocab
that you can use in that process and you
know for sure that it fits exactly the
the purpose that you want it for then
use it right go ahead and use it but
don't try to learn a series of words and
then put them into an essay regardless
right sure go away and learn bow can but
don't automatically try to squash it
into any essay question you can and just
to add a bit to what Barry said when
candidates want to get better scores at
higher levels and they are thinking
about how to use words one of the things
they have to be careful about is
collocation tense what shows whether you
can use language precisely or not I can
give you a simple example for example
you're talking about your experience at
a supermarket and talking about the
items and you want to say that things
were expensive I'm using pretty simple
language here things were expensive I
can say well the cost of the items were
high so I'm using slightly more complex
vocabulary because I'm using cost and
high now I might try to use more complex
language but I may not use it precisely
for example I might say the costs were
lucrative while I should have said well
actually the cost were exorbitant so
that's where the precision comes through
I might use a bit of a range there in
using lucrative or I don't know things
along those lines if I have memorized
lists of synonyms but I may not use them
precisely so it is important to use the
words precisely what sits with what so
what word goes with what other word
which noun goes with what other for
example adjectives or which adjective
goes with which none that's where the
precision comes I had a student recently
three two language who couldn't pass his
writing and I looked at his writing and
his command of English was excellent and
what he'd done
is he'd taken collocations natural
sounding phrases and he'd changed them
by putting a more fancier word in
because he thought he did a higher score
and and it ruined this sort of
naturalness natural you know the
language didn't sound natural anymore
when in fact he should have just used
the simpler collocation yeah I mean that
was actually his era that was his era
that was it was a point five difference
that he couldn't get and it was simply
noticing that okay this is what you your
little issue is but it's actually having
a profound effect on the readability of
your essay because yeah I'd have to read
his paragraphs twice three times and
think oh okay what he's trying to say is
this but he's changed the collocation
okay interesting one of the questions
that I have from students all the time
is about synonyms and people get quite
obsessed with you know there'll be a key
word in the prompt and now they'll you
know they'll try not to mention that
same word twice and they'll come up with
a range of synonyms and of course
imprecision kicks in and the other thing
is that I've found is some words don't
actually have synonyms like the work
child for example or high school it's
very difficult create synonyms what
should a candidate do there well they
shouldn't create synonyms that don't fit
so words like those and there's some
technical words to that you you probably
wouldn't try to find a synonym for so it
is important to vary language where you
can write so for example in a task one a
test taker might say that the sales of
apples go up and every time they talk
about an increase they use the that
language go up and go up go up and that
indicates they've got no other way to
describe that and so that's a weakness
in their language whereas there's a
whole lot of other words that they could
have used to mean an increase and and
then what part of an increase it was so
in those sorts of obvious cases
yes the same word should not be repeated
but where it's a more technical word
like a high school for example or a
child I mean you can replace child with
young person but young person is maybe a
bigger range then than child I wouldn't
try it into it do it where it's possible
and sensible to do it and not in other
cases actually you know you talked about
my experience in physics before when I
changed from physics to writing articles
in fact for newspapers and magazines I
did some work on how I should best be
able to write and I read a book that was
written by I think was the then editor
of The Wall Street Journal when it was a
good newspaper and he talked about a
journalist who was writing a story about
a company in Central America that
produced bananas and at one stage in the
in the article he talked about the bent
yellow fruit so they didn't have to
reuse the banana and that's a classic
example you know that actually in
professional writing a main noun might
get reused multiple times and in the
case of a banana what else do you say
that's right and the other thing is that
I know some candidates are worried about
copying or about not copying the actual
question onto their response and well
they're supposed not to do that but that
fear gets them into using synonyms for
every single word that is used in the in
the question through and then they end
up having written a sentence which
doesn't make sense so if they want to
paraphrase the question material and
write it back onto their response
perhaps it's better not to look back a
lot read a question try to remember the
idea and then use your own language to
produce it and if you want to use
synonyms perhaps use synonyms for
adjectives and adverbs
okay if you focus on the nouns well you
will be struggling to find a synonym for
metropolis or big cities or I don't know
children you would be struggling for
them because these are words that are
commonly used repetitively so that's one
thing to remember which might help just
just last thing on this is what about
word forms of if I use the word popular
and I don't want to use the word popular
again but I use the word popularity is
that considered a range of vocabulary
restructuring the word is fine in the
test I mean even you see you'll see test
takers do that where they restructure
the the words that are in the rubric
itself in the in the prompt itself and
that's regarded as fine if the test
taker does say yeah that's good yeah
paraphrase good paraphrase all right so
that's we've just spoken about the
criteria and the criteria really
encompass everything there's the is
there anything else outside the criteria
that the candidate needs to be aware of
or is everything in there I suppose
there's always the psychological aspects
but yeah I mean probably that advice
about just being a little bit relaxed
don't I know you know that's useless
advice coming from me when your your
whole life might depend on to score you
you're trying to get in the exam you
your visa or your university entrance
right it's it's high stakes for a lot of
test takers so for me to say relax it's
pretty useless but that's kind of what
you've got to train yourself to do
because I know when I'm at an airport I
lose my passport every time I go to the
airport because I put it in a pocket
somewhere I forget which pocket I put it
in and I panic and and then I can't find
it and it's kind of that situation right
that you've just got to calm yourself
down a little bit so you don't get
caught out by miss reading a question in
the test that that's really important
advice not easy I'm not suggesting it's
an easy thing to do and and some people
suffer worse than others as well in test
situations so it's difficult but
certainly you've got to somehow calm
yourself down so you can read carefully
what
you being asked to do reading can
actually really help if you actually
sort of instead of focusing on yourself
focused and trying to understand that
prompting you sort of forget your
anxiety for something exactly yeah I
agree we buried that it's a tough task
to not be stressed when you're actually
going to do a test which might have a
big impact on your life but still it is
very important to be relaxed a piece of
advice that are used to give to my
students and I followed it myself I do
follow it whenever I have to see the
test not I ask though is that if you
can't afford to spend the day before the
test or maybe one afternoon before the
test if you're going to do the test in
the morning the day after just do
nothing with the test try to enjoy
English in the sense that read what you
enjoy watch the movie that you enjoy
listen to the podcast that you enjoy
talk to the people you like in English
and that puts you in the right headspace
it activates everything that you have
learned and it keeps you sharp for the
test day so if you are interested in
reading novels just just pick a good
novel read a good magazine that you like
or as I said go out with friends have a
good chat in English that helps you
unwind a bit before the tests good one
yeah yeah and I'll just add a couple of
things because having set this test
myself a big breakfast is important
because this is it's a bit of a marathon
on test day it's good how long is it two
and a half three hours there's nearly
three hours the written ban yeah I
mentioned we're burning a lot of energy
so if you go with an empty stomach
that's not good and that can also
increase anxiety as well so a nice big
breakfast is a good idea the other thing
that I'll sort of sprue key to language
here is we're running these live online
classes for writing and we do sort of
mock tests where you'll be safe you're
at home in front of on your couch with
your laptop but we put you under time to
pressure and that's excellent because
you get to you get to go through that
whole process of planning and writing
excuse me I need to Pacific board that's
excellent advice actually yeah I've seen
this in in practice where I've had
students in class who wrote
every time they wrote for me they wrote
absolutely excellent essays hmm and the
problem was the time when they meant to
do an exam they were getting banned
files constantly and it turned out that
they were spending three to four times
the amount of time writing their essay
when they were doing them for me than
they had in the exam so the ability to
write the essay in the allowed time
that's really important to practice
doing that and be it's you know when
you're doing it on your own it's really
easy to give yourself an hour for a task
- well you're gonna have 40 minutes
approximately for a task - in about 20
minutes
for a task one is the way that you're
kind of should split up your time and
you need to practice writing - those
requirements now what I used to do with
students is I would give them exactly 40
minutes for a task - or 20 minutes for a
task 1 and they'd have to stop writing
at that point and then yes I would have
to be rewritten from scratch and if you
do that you don't have to do that a huge
number of times you're not doing that
for a month
you you you will increase your speed of
putting your ideas together fairly
quickly if you do it that way then if
you write for an hour and say okay well
next time I'll write for 50 minutes
don't do that give yourself just the
time that you're going to have in the
exam to practice it putting your essay
together one of the shocks that I had on
test day was writing with the paper
based exam was writing with a pencil -
so if you are taking the paper-based
exam don't type your essays as practice
exactly write them by hand because you
know you know we--you may not have done
that for a long time so you know you
know feeling that muscle in your hand
going oh my god yeah so that's and also
if you're doing the the paper-based test
Australia we don't do that anymore
but if you are doing a paper-based test
use the paper that they use in the test
event you can download it from my asad
all the samples on there so download it
and use that paper it also gives you a
good idea of your word count exactly
yeah yeah yeah all right so everything
we've spoken about it's been about
writing tasks - what what applies to
writing task 1 the letter for general or
the graph description or image
description for academic
pretty much everything that we've said
applies for example in the letter for
general training there'll be three dot
points that have to be addressed there
might be multiple parts within a dot
point and as we said before read the
question and answer the question so that
means that you're going to answer three
dot points don't answer to the penalty
for answering to and the public band
descriptors tell you is banned for so
make sure you fully answer the question
with academic I would say the same thing
make sure you're answering the question
but here life is a little bit more
complicated because you have graphs and
diagrams and all sorts of things that
you can get asked but there's additional
things to worry about too and the public
bad descriptors point this out for
example they tell you that at band 5 if
you don't have an overview sort of a
summary statement of what does this data
show that will get been fine in the exam
so you know you can be a native speaker
and certainly when I began to look at
IELTS it's not something I would have
automatically done written an overview
that would have gotten me a high score
but that's a requirement in the exam and
the public ban descriptors make it clear
it's also possible to write a really
good answer to a task one and not use a
single number but give a good indication
of what's been happening and if you do
that in the exam again the public ban
descriptors tell you you will get banned
five for doing it you must support your
answer with data from from the graph or
diagram whatever it is that you're
looking at so those are a couple of
things or overviews and data that
candidates miss quite regularly and and
I mean quite good candidates can miss
those things there's a lot juggle isn't
there in it from this conversation I've
sort of realized the importance of
getting somebody who fully understands
the public band descriptors and puts it
into a good teaching practice for you
because I imagine there are a lot of
good writers who aren't getting the
scores they need simply because they're
just not paying attention or they
haven't been taught the right
information
yeah look that's right and I mentioned
before how I had used the public band
descriptors as a homework exercise for a
group of examiner trainees and to my
surprise when we began the training to a
man they told me and to women in the
group they all told me that they didn't
understand the public band descriptors
and yet every one of those people were
teaching IELTS prep
and I asked them how can you teach a
prep course if you don't understand the
public band descriptors so just because
somebody tells you that look I teach
IELTS to people it doesn't guarantee
that you're going to get good advice
right you really need someone who knows
what I do who's really spent the time
and delved into the descriptors to
understand them - to help give the
clarity to them that's needed to get a
good score in the exam as I said earlier
all the information you need to get a
really high score is available there in
the public band descriptors but every
word means something that's right you
need somebody to translate it almost
because there's a lot of technical
linguistic jargon in there like
subordination yes if you miss that would
you know the impact can be enormous
yeah great so yeah I'm comfortable
everything we do here at e2 language our
teachers know all of this back to front
and we also have the ability to explain
it in a way that the candidate can
understand without the technical NSTIC
jogging's they after the exam they they
don't need to know what subordination is
anymore exactly good I just thought
lastly we're talking about the what I
think is really exciting developments
with the IELTS is the computer-based
test I've taken this test and I thought
it was it was a great experience it was
really comfortable it was convenient I
thought because of the the environment
the test was still challenging but I
thought it was a simpler experience so
Reza I understand you're sort of
managing part of this and I also
understand that there's now I just read
yesterday there's 55 computer-based
testing centers around the world right
yes and growing
well as you said it's a different
experience for and I assume for some or
many candidates it might be a less
daunting experience and more familiar
experience of sitting behind the
computer screen and doing things they
may like the cleaner shape of things you
just type in your responses and they go
away yeah and you can deal with the next
part when it comes to the writing
section of the test and I think I
already mentioned this it's not
different to the paper-based Isles in
the sense that the questions are the
same the word length that you have to
stick to is the same and you have to you
will be assessed on the very same
criteria for which the paper-based
scripts are assessed perhaps the only
thing you should be mindful of is that
because the platform is different and
now you're typing you need a different
set of skills if you are not
particularly good at typing you might be
at a disadvantage or if you are
particularly good at typing you might
produce long responses that may contain
spelling errors for example and the test
platform doesn't have a spellcheck so
you might confidently taught a lot of
words without thinking that a word well
I may have missed
spelt certain words there and that's not
a good risk to take well apart from that
I don't think there is much to add it's
essentially the same thing
it's just the convenience of doing it on
the screen and also the advantage of
getting this course or do report form a
bit earlier than you would in a
paper-based test right yep so you guys
are happy with the way the
computer-based test is rolling up the
success of it and yeah it's been ramping
up fairly quickly in fact it's it's much
better from our perspective because it's
typed and we don't have to worry about
reading handwriting which can be
struggled as struggle to do that at
times the other thing that I'd add with
with the computer-based is is
soon as Reza said do need to concern
themselves about their typing skills to
some extent so how do you show a
paragraph right what should you do at
the end of a sentence those sorts of
technical things if you're not used to
typing they they should be a concern
and make sure you find out about those
things before I'm doing the test because
it can lead someone for example it's
return at the end of every sentence then
now they've created paragraphs right now
if it's the only thing they do
throughout the essay then that would be
an issue for examples so there are some
additional skills but as you mentioned
before about being able to type more
quickly than you can write by hand
that's certainly in general the case and
so we tend to see longer our responses
to questions and as we said before you
don't need to go much over 250 words you
know in a task to to be happy with the
content of your answer make sure you see
the test takers got some time to review
what they've done and particularly to
pick up things like typos and other
errors that they might have made cool
good stuff great well thanks very much
for coming down and appreciate
enormously all right yeah thanks for the
opportunity and thank you also for the
work you do in in making visible the and
transparent through the rules by which
the the exam is marked we think that is
extremely important so well done from
your end thank you it's good to be here
thank you thanks for listening to e to
talks next month J talks with Alex e to
expert teacher about e to school
remember to check out ET language comm
for all your test prep needs
Thanks